In this chapter, the authors discuss the various emissions pathways proposed in the IPCC's sixth assessment report and their effects on expected future greenhouse gas emissions. They examine more than 2000 "quantitative emissions pathways" that have been suggested in the report. In order to help understand how these pathways stack up against each other, they look at the complete literature on the subject. The author discusses the different types of emission reduction strategies offered by the various parties in the study. He discusses the role of energy in calculating the amount of warming likely to occur and discusses the relative importance of different fuels and technologies in determining how much warming will be felt in the world. Next, he discusses the various mitigation strategies presented in the AR6. Overall, the report shows that there is little consensus on how best to fight climate change, especially when it comes to reducing carbon dioxide emissions. However, there is disagreement on how exactly to do so. Some people think that doing nothing would be better than doing nothing, while others argue that doing something would be even worse since it would involve countries having to spend money that they do not have. The authors present five different mitigation strategies that are used in the United States. Each of these approaches focuses on different aspects of energy demand and uses different means to achieve the same end. For example, if you cut back on coal-fired power plants, you might end up paying more for your utility bills. If you cut off all electric power, you could end up spending more on natural gas. You might cut down on food prices, which would cause inflation. But what about all those who rely on paper goods like pencils and ink? What about cars and machinery and high-tech items like solar panels and LED lighting? Are these going to be very important in the future? The authors suggest that we should focus on these kinds of things rather than relying solely on fossil fuels because they are relatively new and less reliable.


In this chapter, the authors discuss demand side mitigation strategies and how they fit into a broader picture of what it means to mitigate climate change in terms of services. Specifically, they examine how demand for goods and services can be used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. They argue that if people demand better services, rather than just physical resources, then there is great potential for reducing emissions. In particular, they see huge potential for avoiding shifts in energy use and moving from coal-fired power plants to natural gas or renewables. They also show how important it is to think holistically about long-term trends since large systems take a lot of time to get up and running. The authors believe that individual actions have the biggest potential to impact individual well being but that larger changes in society as a whole can also have a significant impact on reducing carbon footprints over time due to innovations in transportation, agriculture, buildings, and other ways people interact with each other. Overall, demand side strategies have the highest potential to make a significant difference in reducing greenhouse gasses . However, they still see a need for more specific measures such as focusing on achieving "avoid-shift-improvements" , i.e., things like giving car-free access to public transportation and electric cars, which could potentially save 2 percent per year. As discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7, the different types of improvement are avoid-shift improve and improve. In order to really effect change, however, you need to think about what kinds of shift you can do along the value chain. What kinds of improvement do you need? Well, we might think of something like an energy efficiency campaign, but don't necessarily focus on making appliances more energy efficient because those aren't very effective. We're not going to lie down and say your neighborhood doesn't have much to do with energy efficiency either. Instead, we may benefit from investing in things like green energy and walking and riding electric vehicles.



