long term population movements (shift) from rural to urban areas;gradual increase in the proportion  of people living in urban areas, and the ways in which each society adapts to the 
change;process by which towns and cities are formed and become larger often associated with increased incomes and higher consumption, the growing concentration of people and activities 
is an opportunity to increase resource efficiency and decarbonize at scale. Most future urban population growth will occur in developing countries, where per capita emissions are currently 
low but expected to increase with the construction and use of new infrastructure and the built environment, and changes in incomes and lifestyles. The drivers of urban gas in an atmosphere 
of a planet (usually Earth) that absorbs and emits radiation within the thermal infrared range and causes the greenhouse effect emissions are complex and include an interplay of population 
size, income, state of urbanization, and how cities are laid out. How new cities and towns are designed, constructed, managed, and powered will lock-in behaviour, lifestyles, and future
urban GHG emissions. The urban share of regional GHG emissions increased between 2000 and 2015, with much inter region variation in the magnitude of the increase the urban emissions share
across WGIII AR6 regions increased from 28% to 38% in Africa, from 46% to 54% in Asia and Developing Pacific, from 62% to 72% in Developed Countries, from 57% to 62% in Eastern Europe and
West-Central Asia, with cities in the Developed Countries region producing nearly seven times more per capita than the lowest emitting region the global urban GHG emissions per capita 
increased from 5.5 to 6.2 tCO2-eq/person (an increase of 11.8%); Africa increased from 1.3 to 1.5 tCO2-eq per person (22.6%); Asia and Developing Pacific increased from 3.0 to 5.1 tCO2-eq 
per person (71.7%); Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia increased from 6.9 to 9.8 tCO2-eq/person (40.9%); Latin America and the Caribbean increased from 2.7 to 3.7 tCO2-eq/person (40.4%); 
and Middle East increased from 7.4 to 9.6 tCO2-eq/person (30.1%). Albeit starting from the highest level, Developed Countries had a decline of 11.4 to 10.7 tCO2-eq/person.The global share 
of future urban GHG emissions is expected to increase through 2050 with moderate to no reduction of something harmful or the reduction of its harmful effects efforts due to growth trends 
in population, urban land expansion and infrastructure and service demands, but the extent of the increase depends on the scenario and the scale and timing of urban mitigation action. 
With aggressive and immediate reduction policies to limit global warming below 1.5°C by the end of the century, including high levels of converting a device,process process, or society to 
the use of electric power, energy and material efficiency, renewable energy preferences, and socio-behavioural responses, urban GHG emissions could approach net zero and reach a maximum 
of 3 GtCO2-eq in 2050. with aggressive but not immediate urban mitigation policies to limit global warming to 2°C, urban emissions could reach 17 GtCO2-eq in 2050. With no urban mitigation
efforts, urban emissions could more than double from 2020 levels and reach 65 GtCO2-eq in 2050, while being limited to GtCO2-eq in 2050 with only moderate mitigation efforts. Urban land
areas could triple between 2015 and 2050, with significant implications for future self-perpetuating inertia created by large fossil  fuel-based energy systems that inhibits public and 
private efforts to introduce alternative energy technologies. The construction of new, and upgrading of, existing urban infrastructure through 2030 will result in significant emissions.
Cities can only achieve net zero or near net zero GHG emissions through deep decarbonisation and systemic transformation (very high confidence). Urban deep decarbonisation entails 
implementing three broad strategies concurrently: (1) reducing urban energy consumption across sectors, including through compact and efficient urban forms and supporting infrastructure; 
electrification and switching to net zero emissions resources; and (3) enhancing carbon uptake and stocks (medium evidence, high agreement). Given the regional and global reach of urban 
supply chains, a city cannot achieve net zero GHG emissions by only focusing on reducing emissions within its administrative boundaries. Compact cities with shortened distances between 
housing and jobs, and interventions that support a modal shift away from private  motor vehicles towards walking, cycling, and low-emissions shared and public transportation, passive 
energy comfort in buildings. Urban green infrastructure(street trees, green roofs) and blue infrastructure can mitigate climate change through carbon sequestration, avoided emissions,
and reduced energy use while offering multiple co-benefits reducing stormwater runoff, improving air quality, and improving mental and physical health of urban dwellers. Rapidly growing 
cities can avoid higher future emissions through urban planning to co-locate jobs and housing to achieve compact urban form, and by leapfrogging to low-carbon technologies. Established 
cities will achieve the largest GHG emissions savings by replacing, repurposing, or retrofitting the building stock, strategic infilling and densifying, as well as through modal shift and 
the electrification of the urban energy system. New and emerging cities have unparalleled potential to become low or net zero GHG emissions while achieving high quality of life by creating 
compact, co-located, and walkable urban areas with mixed land use and transit-oriented design, that also preserve existing green and blue assets. The upgrading of informal settlements and 
inadequate housing to improve resilience and well-being offers a chance to create a low-carbon transition. However, there is limited quantifiable data  on these practices and their 
cumulative impacts on GHG emissions. large and complex infrastructure projects for urban mitigation are often beyond the capacity of local municipality budgets, practical authority granted
to a formally constituted legal body or to a political leader to deal with legal matters, and institutions. Partnerships between cities and international institutions, national and region 
governments, transnational networks, and local stakeholders play a pivotal role in mobilizing global climate finance resources for a range of infrastructure projects with low-carbon emissions 
and related spatial planning programs across key sectors.
